[siemenshvac] Initial contribution (#14263)
openhab/openhab-addons: bundles/org.openhab.binding.siemenshvac/README.md

----------------|----------------|----------------|------------------
baseUrl         | yes            |                | The address of the OZW672 devices
userName        | yes            | Administrator  | The user name to log into the OZW672
userPass        | yes            |                | The user password to log into the OZW672

## Channels

Channels are auto-discovered, you will find them on the RVS things.
They are organized the same way as the LCD screen of your PAC device, by top level menu functionality, and sub-functionalities.
Each channel is strongly typed, so for example, for heating mode, openHAB will provide you with a list of choices supported by the device.

Channel                | Description                                              | Type          | Unit     | Security Access Level   |  ReadOnly | Advanced
-----------------------|----------------------------------------------------------|---------------|----------|-------------------------|-----------|-------------------
control-boiler-approval  | Set Boiler Approval (`AUTO`, `OFF`, `ON`)                | String        |          |                         |  R/W      | true

> control-program         | Set Program (`OFF`, `NORMAL`, `WARMWATER`, `MANUAL`)     | String        |          |                         |  R/W      | true

Reviewer: Can you reformat this table for proper alignment when viewing the source?

Author: Fix in next commit.

Reviewer: It still look aligned from second colum.

Author: fix in next commit

         
![Diagram](doc/Diagram.png)                 
 
There's a lot of different HVAC controllers depending on model in lot of different PAC constructors.
Siemens RVS41.813/327 inside a Atlantic Hybrid Duo was used for the development, and is fully supported and tested.

Siemens have a complete set of controller references under the name "Siemens Albatros".
Here is a picture of such device.
You can also find this device in other types of heating systems: boiler or solar based.

![](doc/Albatros.jpg)

You will find some information about the OZW672.01 gateway on the Siemens web site: 

[OZW 672 Page](https://hit.sbt.siemens.com/RWD/app.aspx?rc=FR&lang=fr&module=Catalog&action=ShowProduct&key=BPZ:OZW672.01)

With this binding, you will be able to:

- Consult the different parameters of your system, like temperature, current heating mode, water temperature, and many more.
- Modify the functioning mode of your device: temperature set point, heating mode, and others.

## Supported Things

Support many different things as the thing type is handle by autodiscovery.

Mainly, it will first discover the gateway.
Currently test was done with the OZW672.x series.

> No test was conduct using the OZW772.x series, the code will currently not handing initialization of OZW772 gateway.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
No test was conducted using the OZW772.x series, the code will currently not handle initialization of an OZW772 gateway.
```

Author: fix on next commit

Reviewer: Can you also add either "an" or "the" before "OZW772 gateway"?

Author: fix in next commit

> You can request support to the community forum is you have the gateway model and want it to be supported.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can request support in the community forum, if you have the gateway model and want it to be supported.
```

Author: fix on next commit

         
![Diagram](doc/Diagram.png)                 
 
There's a lot of different HVAC controllers depending on model in lot of different PAC constructors.
Siemens RVS41.813/327 inside a Atlantic Hybrid Duo was used for the development, and is fully supported and tested.

Siemens have a complete set of controller references under the name "Siemens Albatros".
Here is a picture of such device.
You can also find this device in other types of heating systems: boiler or solar based.

![](doc/Albatros.jpg)

You will find some information about the OZW672.01 gateway on the Siemens web site: 

[OZW 672 Page](https://hit.sbt.siemens.com/RWD/app.aspx?rc=FR&lang=fr&module=Catalog&action=ShowProduct&key=BPZ:OZW672.01)

With this binding, you will be able to:

- Consult the different parameters of your system, like temperature, current heating mode, water temperature, and many more.
- Modify the functioning mode of your device: temperature set point, heating mode, and others.

## Supported Things

Support many different things as the thing type is handle by autodiscovery.

Mainly, it will first discover the gateway.
Currently test and support is the OZW672.x series.

> No test done with OZW772.x series, but it should work as well.

Author: I removed this test

> No test done with OZW772.x series, but it should work as well.

Reviewer: What did you remove? The discovery still checks explicitly for OZW672, so maybe it should be stated that it might work, but that the Bridge will need to be created manually in this case?

----------------|----------------|----------------|------------------
baseUrl         | yes            |                | The address of the OZW672 devices
userName        | yes            | Administrator  | The user name to log into the OZW672
userPass        | yes            |                | The user password to log into the OZW672

## Thing Configuration

## Channels

Channels are auto-discovered, you will find them on the RVS things.
They are organized the same way as the LCD screen of your PAC device, by top level menu functionality, and sub-functionalities.
Each channel is strongly typed, so for example, for heating mode, openHAB will provide you with a list of choices supported by the device.

Channel                | Description                                              | Type          | Unit     | Security Access Level   |  ReadOnly | Advanced
-----------------------|----------------------------------------------------------|---------------|----------|-------------------------|-----------|-------------------
controlBoilerApproval  | Set Boiler Approval (`AUTO`, `OFF`, `ON`)                | String        |          |                         |  R/W      | true

> controlProgram         | Set Program (`OFF`, `NORMAL`, `WARMWATER`, `MANUAL`)     | String        |          |                         |  R/W      | true

Author: fix on next commit

Numeric                | Number                                   | Handle basic numeric value
String                 | String                                   | a String
TimeOfDay              | TimeOfDay                                |
Datetime               | Datetime                                 |
RadioButton            | RadioButton                              |
Scheduler              | Scheduler                                |
Temperature            | Number                                   | Use to handle reading of  temperatur
Setpoint               | Number                                   | Handle the setting of a temperature
Regime                 | Number                                   | Enumeration for handling mode change
   
## Full Example

Things file `.things`

```java
Bridge siemenshvac:ozw672:local "Ozw672" [ baseUrl="https://192.168.254.42/", userName="Administrator", userPassword="mypass"  ] 
{
    Thing RVS41_813_327 local "RVS41.813/327"  [  ]
    {
        Channels:
            Type Setpoint:temperature                 "Temperature"  [ id="1726" ]

>             Type Regime:cc1                           "CC1"          [ id="1725" ]

Author: The channel type is autodiscovered.
Just after adding the RVS slave device, you will have something like this in the UI:

![image](https://github.com/openhab/openhab-addons/assets/4678815/3f5a1aff-7d5e-41d8-82c9-84a9c92b1236)

You d'ont have to defined manually the channels, you can realy only on auto-discovering features.

>             Type Regime:cc1                           "CC1"          [ id="1725" ]

Reviewer: So why are these channel definitions listed in the example, it should be sufficient to create items and link them to existing channels?

>             Type Regime:cc1                           "CC1"          [ id="1725" ]

Author: Ok, removed them

    
    }
```

Items file `.items`

```java

> String              Boiler_State_Pump_HWS       "HWS Pump State [%s]"                   { channel = "siemenshvac:RVS41_813_327:local:local:2237#2259_PpeChargeECS"              }       

Author: It's valid, but can change from installation to other installation.
In fact, there is three different ID that uis used.

In the following description : 2237 is the menuId, and 2259 is the item ID.
You can see them is the screenshoot I put above.

The is also the datapointId, what I call at some place the dptId, and what the thind in the channel description as "Id".
This is the important one, because we use it has the parameters in the read/write api operations.

Type Setpoint:temperature                 "Temperature"  [ id="1726" ]

So the first one is not really important : "siemenshvac:RVS41_813_327:local:local:2237#2259_PpeChargeECS" ,you just need to match what is list in the autodiscovery, or in the Channel definition if you do it manually.

> String              Boiler_State_Pump_HWS       "HWS Pump State [%s]"                   { channel = "siemenshvac:RVS41_813_327:local:local:2237#2259_PpeChargeECS"              }       

Author: fix the channel sample to match the last modification on the UidUtils.sanetizeId

Number              Boiler_State_HWS            "HWS State [%s]"                        { channel = "siemenshvac:RVS41_813_327:local:local:2032#2035_Etat_ECS"                  }

> Number:Temperature  Flow_Temperature_Real       "Flow Temparature Real [%.1f °C]"       { channel = "siemenshvac:RVS41_813_327:local:local:2237#2248_ValReelleTempDep_CC1"      }   

Reviewer: I can't seem to find `Number:Temperature` being generated as item type in the code, perhaps you can guide me? This would require updating by `QuantityType`.

Author: I will have to check, I'm not sure I handle it in the code has Number:Temperature, but as simple Number.

Reviewer: Fixed by UoM chnages?

Author: Yes, fix by UoM changes

# SiemensHvac Binding

This binding is to support Siemens Hvac controller ecosystem, and the Web Gateway interface OZW672.
A typical system is composed of:

> 

Author: Fix in next commit

> 

Reviewer: It seems this commit has not been pushed. Please also check other blank lines in the README.

> <=== Ethernet ===>   | OZW672 | <====== ¨BSB/LPB BUS ======> | Hvac Controler (RVS41.813/327) | ====== | Internal device in your system : sensors, boiler, external pac unit, ... |

Author: Remove Ascii and add an image instead

> <=== Ethernet ===>   | OZW672 | <====== ¨BSB/LPB BUS ======> | Hvac Controler (RVS41.813/327) | ====== | Internal device in your system : sensors, boiler, external pac unit, ... |

Reviewer: Looks great!

> There's a lot of different Hvac controler depending on model in lot of different PAC constructor.

Author: fix in next commit

> Mine is a Atlantic Hybrid duo whith a Siemens RVS41.813/327 inside.

Author: fix in next commit

> Siemens have a complete set of controler reference under the name "Siemens Albatros".

Author: fix in next commit

> Here some picture of such device.

Author: fix in next commit

> You can also find this device in other type of heating system : boiler or solar based.

Author: fix in next commit

![](doc/Albatros.jpg)

> You will find some information about the OZW672.01 gateway on siemens web site : 

Author: fix in next commit

> You will find some information about the OZW672.01 gateway on siemens web site : 

Reviewer: Please also remove the space before the colon as this is only used in French, not in English. 🙂

[OZW 672 Page]

> ([https://hit.sbt.siemens.com/RWD/app.aspx?rc=FR&lang=fr&module=Catalog&action=ShowProduct&key=BPZ:OZW672.01)

Author: fix in next commit

> ([https://hit.sbt.siemens.com/RWD/app.aspx?rc=FR&lang=fr&module=Catalog&action=ShowProduct&key=BPZ:OZW672.01)

Reviewer: It seems this was missed.

With this binding, you will be able :

- To consult the different parameters of your system like temperature, current heating mode, water temperature, and many more.

> - Modify the functionning mode of your device : temperature set point, heating mode, and others.

Author: fix in next commit

> 

Author: fix in next commit

## Supported Things

> Support many different things as the thing type is handle by autodiscovery.

Reviewer: I think this can be adapted depending on the outcome of the [thing type discussion](https://github.com/openhab/openhab-addons/pull/14263#discussion_r1598335493).

> Support many different things as the thing type is handle by autodiscovery.

Reviewer: Suggestion: If no Things list can be provided that would help with manual configuration, could we drop this entire chapter? The notes (e.g. about discovery and gateway model support/tests) could be merged into the next chapter: Discovery.

> Support many different things as the thing type is handle by autodiscovery.

Author: So to be sure : your recommandation is two remove the chapter ## Supported Things, and move the usefull consideration inside the ## Discovery chapters ?

> Support many different things as the thing type is handle by autodiscovery.

Author: I've removed the section.

## Discovery

Discovery of Gateway can be done using Upnp.
Just switch off/on your gateway to make it annonce itself on the network.
The gateway should appears in the Inbox a few minutes after.
Be aware what you will have to modifity the password in Gateway parameters just after the discovering to make it work properly.
Be also aware that first initialization is a little long because we need to read all the metadata from the device.

Discovery of Hvac device have to be done through the Scan button inside the binding.
Go to the thing page, click on the "+" button, select the siemensHvac binding, and then click Scan.
Your device should appears on the page after a few seconds.

## Binding Configuration

There is no particular configuration to be done.
The only revelant parameters is on the OZW672 thing for the user and password to use to connect to the gateway.
IP should have be discovered automatically via UPNP.

## Bridge Configuration

| Parameter       | Required | Default       | Description                                                         |
|-----------------|----------|---------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------|

> | ipAdress        | yes      |               | The address of the OZW672 devices                                   |

Author: Fix in next commit

| userName        | yes      | Administrator | The userName to log into the OZW672                                 | 

> | userPass        | yes      |               | The userPassword to log into the OZW672                             | 

Author: Fix in next commit

| TimeOfDay        | TimeOfDay    |                                                          | 
| Datetime         | Datetime     |                                                          | 
| RadioButton      | RadioButton  |                                                          | 
| Scheduler        | Scheduler    |                                                          | 
| Temperature      | Number       | Use to handle reading of  temperature                    | 
| Setpoint         | Number       | Handle the setting of a temperature                      | 
| Regime           | Number       | Enumeration for handling mode change                     |

## Full Example

Things file `.things`

```java
Bridge siemenshvac:ozw672:local "Ozw672"@"Chaufferie" [ baseUrl="https://192.168.254.42/", userName="Administrator", userPassword="mypass"  ] 
{
    Thing RVS41_813_327 local "RVS41.813/327" @ "Chaudiere"  [  ]
    {
        Channels:
            Type Setpoint:temperature                 "Température"  [ id="1726" ]
            Type Regime:cc1                           "CC1"          [ id="1725" ]
    
    }
```

Items file `.items`

```java

> Sring   Chaudiere_Etat_Pompe_ECS    "Etat Pompe ECS [%s]"   { channel = "siemenshvac:RVS41_813_327:local:local:2237#2259_PpeChargeECS"          }       

Author: fix in next commit

# SiemensHvac Binding

> This binding is to support Siemens Hvac controller ecosystem, and the Web Gateway interface OZW672.

Reviewer: I think HVAC should also be capitalized?

Be aware what you will have to modifity the password in Gateway parameters just after the discovering to make it work properly.
Be also aware that first initialization is a little long because we need to read all the metadata from the device.

Discovery of Hvac device have to be done through the Scan button inside the binding.
Go to the thing page, click on the "+" button, select the siemensHvac binding, and then click Scan.
Your device should appears on the page after a few seconds.

## Binding Configuration

There is no particular configuration to be done.
The only revelant parameters is on the OZW672 thing for the user and password to use to connect to the gateway.
IP should have be discovered automatically via UPNP.

## Bridge Configuration

Parameter       | Required       | Default        | Description
----------------|----------------|----------------|------------------
baseUrl         | yes            |                | The address of the OZW672 devices
userName        | yes            | Administrator  | The user name to log into the OZW672
userPass        | yes            |                | The user password to log into the OZW672

## Thing Configuration

> 

Author: Sorry, remove it

> 

Reviewer: 👍 It might become relevant again though, depending on the [thing type discussion](https://github.com/openhab/openhab-addons/pull/14263#discussion_r1598335493), since you should be able to identify the device from the Thing's configuration rather than something embedded into the Thing Type ID or properties.

Be also aware that first initialization is a little long because we need to read all the metadata from the device.

Discovery of Hvac device have to be done through the Scan button inside the binding.
Go to the thing page, click on the "+" button, select the siemensHvac binding, and then click Scan.
Your device should appears on the page after a few seconds.

## Binding Configuration

There is no particular configuration to be done.
The only revelant parameters is on the OZW672 thing for the user and password to use to connect to the gateway.
IP should have be discovered automatically via UPNP.

## Bridge Configuration

<table>
  <tr>
    <th>Parameter</th>
    <th>Required</th>
    <th>Default</th>
    <th>Description</th>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>baseUrl</td>
    <td>yes</td>
    <td></td>
    <td>The address of the OZW672 devices</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>userName</td>
    <td>yes</td>
    <td>Administrator</td>
    <td>The user name to log into the OZW672</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>userPass</td>
    <td>yes</td>
    <td></td>
    <td>The user password to log into the OZW672</td>
  </tr>

> </table>

Reviewer: Please use Markdown for formatting the table rather than HTML (all tables in this file).

  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Numeric</td>
    <td>Number</td>
    <td>Handle basic numeric value</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>String</td>
    <td>String</td>
    <td>a String</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>String_16</td>
    <td>String</td>
    <td>a String of length <= 16 char</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>TimeOfDay</td>
    <td>TimeOfDay</td>
    <td></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Datetime</td>
    <td>Datetime</td>
    <td></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>RadioButton</td>
    <td>RadioButton</td>
    <td></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Scheduler</td>
    <td>Scheduler</td>
    <td></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Temperature</td>
    <td>Number</td>
    <td>Use to handle reading of  temperature</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Setpoint</td>
    <td>Number</td>
    <td>Handle the setting of a temperature</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Regime</td>
    <td>Number</td>
    <td>Enumeration for handling mode change</td>
  </tr>
</table>

## Full Example

Things file `.things`

```java
Bridge siemenshvac:ozw672:local "Ozw672"@"Chaufferie" [ baseUrl="https://192.168.254.42/", userName="Administrator", userPassword="mypass"  ] 
{
    Thing RVS41_813_327 local "RVS41.813/327" @ "Chaudiere"  [  ]
    {
        Channels:

>             Type Setpoint:temperature                 "Température"  [ id="1726" ]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            Type Setpoint:temperature                 "Temperature"  [ id="1726" ]
```

            Type Regime:cc1                           "CC1"          [ id="1725" ]
    
    }
```

Items file `.items`

```java
String  Boiler_State_Pump_HWS       "HWS Pump State [%s]"                   { channel = "siemenshvac:RVS41_813_327:local:local:2237#2259_PpeChargeECS"              }       
Number  Boiler_State_HWS            "HWS State [%s]"                        { channel = "siemenshvac:RVS41_813_327:local:local:2032#2035_Etat_ECS"                  }

> Number  Flow_Temperature_Real       "Flow Temparature Real [%.1f °C]"       { channel = "siemenshvac:RVS41_813_327:local:local:2237#2248_ValReelleTempDep_CC1"      }   
> Number  Flow_Temperature_Setpoint   "Flow Temperature Setpoint [%.1f °C]"   { channel = "siemenshvac:RVS41_813_327:local:local:2237#2249_ConsTDepResultCC1"         }   

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Number:Temperature Flow_Temperature_Real       "Flow Temparature Real [%.1f °C]"       { channel = "siemenshvac:RVS41_813_327:local:local:2237#2248_ValReelleTempDep_CC1"      }   
Number:Temperature Flow_Temperature_Setpoint   "Flow Temperature Setpoint [%.1f °C]"   { channel = "siemenshvac:RVS41_813_327:local:local:2237#2249_ConsTDepResultCC1"         }   
```

> # SiemensHvac Binding

Reviewer 2: This file will need to be updated in regard to a merge.

The gateway should appears in the Inbox a few minutes after.
Be aware what you will have to modifity the password in Gateway parameters just after the discovering to make it work properly.
Be also aware that first initialization is a little long because we need to read all the metadata from the device.

Discovery of Hvac device have to be done through the Scan button inside the binding.
Go to the thing page, click on the "+" button, select the siemensHvac binding, and then click Scan.
Your device should appears on the page after a few seconds.

## Binding Configuration

There is no particular configuration to be done.
The only revelant parameters is on the OZW672 thing for the user and password to use to connect to the gateway.
IP should have be discovered automatically via UPNP.

## Thing Configuration

## Channels

Channels are autodiscovered, you will find them on the RVS things.
They are organized the same way as the LCD screen of your PAC device, by top level menu functionnality, and sub-functionnalities.
Each channel are strongly typed, so for exemple, for heating mode, openhab will provide you with a list of choice supported by the device.

> 

Author: Need to review this one more in depth, gateway can be initialized from things, but not device.
Something is wrong with my ChannelTypeProvider, need to rewrite some portions.

> 

Author: Ok, review the Channel Type to handle correctly initialization from files.
Also fill the Readme.md with some samples

# SiemensHVAC Binding

This binding provides support for the Siemens HVAC controller ecosystem, and the Web Gateway interface OZW672.
A typical system is composed of:
         
![Diagram](doc/Diagram.png)                 
 
There's a lot of different HVAC controllers depending on model in lot of different PAC constructors.
Siemens RVS41.813/327 inside a Atlantic Hybrid Duo was used for the development, and is fully supported and tested.

Siemens have a complete set of controller references under the name "Siemens Albatros".
Here is a picture of such device.
You can also find this device in other types of heating systems: boiler or solar based.

![](doc/Albatros.jpg)

You will find some information about the OZW672.01 gateway on the Siemens web site: 

[OZW 672 Page](https://hit.sbt.siemens.com/RWD/app.aspx?rc=FR&lang=fr&module=Catalog&action=ShowProduct&key=BPZ:OZW672.01)

With this binding, you will be able to:

- Consult the different parameters of your system, like temperature, current heating mode, water temperature, and many more.
- Modify the functioning mode of your device: temperature set point, heating mode, and others.

> OZW672 gateway support many different languages (about 16).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The OZW672 gateway supports many different languages (about 16).
```

Author: fix on next commit

> The binding should work ok with all language choice, but is currently test more thoroughly for French and English language.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The binding should work with all language choices, but is currently tested more thoroughly with French and English as configured language.
```
```suggestion
The binding should work ok with all language choice, but is currently test more thoroughly for French and English language.
```

Author: fix on next commit

> If you use other language, and find some issues, you can report them on the OpenHab forum.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you use other language, and find some issues, you can report them on the openHAB forum.
```

Author: fix on next commit

## Discovery

Discovery of Gateway can be done using UPnP.
Just switch off/on your gateway to make it annonce itself on the network.
The gateway should appear in the Inbox a few minutes after.
Be aware what you will have to modify the password in Gateway parameters just after the discovery to make it work properly.
Be also aware that first initialization is a little long because the binding needs to read all the metadata from the device.

Currently test was done with the OZW672.x series.
No test was conducted using the OZW772.x series, the code will currently not handle initialization of an OZW772 gateway.
You can request support in the community forum, if you have the gateway model and want it to be supported.

Discovery of HVAC device inside your PAC (controller of type RVS...) have to be done through the Scan button inside the binding.
Go to the Thing page, click on the "+" button, select the SiemensHVAC binding, and then click Scan.
Your device should appear on the page after a few seconds.
Only test in real condition with RVS41.813/327 have beend done, but it should work with all other type as the api interface is standard.

> 

Author: fix in next commit
